Split library techniques into static (bundled) and dynamic (loaded) for Android and iOS (by @Vulnit) (#3789)
OWASP/mastg: techniques/android/MASTG-TECH-0029.md

Reviewer: ````suggestion
## Using Process Memory Maps

The Linux kernel exposes the memory map of every process through the virtual file `/proc/<pid>/maps`. Each line describes one mapped region and contains: the virtual address range, memory permissions (`r`ead/`w`rite/e`x`ecute/`p`rivate or `s`hared), the offset within the backing file, the device, the inode, and the pathname.

Use @MASTG-TOOL-0004 to read this file for the target process (root is required on production builds):

```bash
PID=$(adb shell pidof org.owasp.mastestapp)
adb shell "su -c 'cat /proc/$PID/maps'" | grep "\.so\|base\.apk"
```

Each native library appears once per loaded ELF segment — typically one `r-xp` (executable code), one `r--p` (read-only data), and one `rw-p` (writable data) region:

```bash
788010c000-788010d000 r-xp 01594000 fd:34 33390  .../org.owasp.mastestapp-.../base.apk
7880110000-7880111000 r--p 01594000 fd:34 33390  .../org.owasp.mastestapp-.../base.apk
```

The pathname in the maps file depends on whether the app extracts its native libraries to disk or maps them directly from the APK — see [Understanding `extractNativeLibs`](#understanding-extractnativelibs) below.

## Using @MASTG-TOOL-0001 (Frida)

As an alternative to reading `/proc/<pid>/maps` directly, `Process.enumerateModules()` returns all modules currently loaded in process memory. Filter by `.so` and exclude system paths to focus on app-bundled libraries:

```javascript
Process.enumerateModules()
  .filter(m => m.path.endsWith('.so')
            && !m.path.startsWith('/system')
            && !m.path.startsWith('/apex')
            && !m.path.startsWith('/vendor'));
```

Example output for a custom `org.owasp.mastestapp` APK with a `librootcheck.so` native library:

```json
[
  {
    "name": "librootcheck.so",
    "base": "0x788010c000",
    "size": 20480,
    "path": "/data/app/~~faDel4fspvWulzbkYmAMPg==/org.owasp.mastestapp-cJY-.../base.apk!/lib/arm64-v8a/librootcheck.so"
  }
]
```

Note that `size` (20480 bytes), which is the size of the library in memory, is larger than the on-disk library size (4400 bytes): the linker allocates full memory pages for each ELF segment and the virtual address range spans the gaps between them.

## Understanding `extractNativeLibs`

The path returned by `/proc/<pid>/maps` or `Process.enumerateModules()` depends on the value of [`android:extractNativeLibs`](https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/manifest/application-element#extractNativeLibs) in the app's manifest.

**`extractNativeLibs="true"`** (legacy behaviour): the `.so` files are extracted from the APK to the device filesystem under `/data/app/<package>/lib/<abi>/` at install time. The path points directly to the extracted file:

```
/data/app/org.example.app-.../lib/arm64/libnative.so
```

**`extractNativeLibs="false"`** (default since API 23 / `targetSdkVersion >= 23`): the `.so` files are stored **uncompressed and page-aligned** inside the APK and the linker maps them directly from the APK using a byte offset. The path uses the `<apk>!/<path>` notation:

```
/data/app/~~<hash>/org.example.app-<hash>/base.apk!/lib/arm64-v8a/libnative.so
```

The page-alignment is enforced by `zipalign` (or the Gradle build tools), which pads the ZIP local-file extra field so that each `.so` data starts at a 4 KB or 16 KB boundary within the APK file.

In the example above, `librootcheck.so` uses the second variant: `zipalign` placed it at offset `0x01594000` inside `base.apk`, matching the `r-xp 01594000` entry in `/proc/<pid>/maps`.

## Extracting the Library

### From Process Memory Using frida_dump

When the library must be obtained from memory — for example, because it is encrypted or compressed on disk, or because you need the binary state after runtime self-modification — use [frida_dump](https://github.com/lasting-yang/frida_dump).

The tool uses @MASTG-TOOL-0001 to call `Memory.protect()` on the entire virtual address range of the module (making the unmapped gaps between ELF segments readable), reads all bytes with `readByteArray()`, and repairs the resulting in-memory ELF layout using the bundled [SoFixer](https://github.com/F8LEFT/SoFixer).

```bash
git clone https://github.com/lasting-yang/frida_dump
cd frida_dump

# Dump a specific library by name (app must be in the foreground)
python dump_so.py librootcheck.so
```

Output:

```bash
{'name': 'librootcheck.so', 'base': '0x788010c000', 'size': 20480,
 'path': '.../base.apk!/lib/arm64-v8a/librootcheck.so'}
adb shell /data/local/tmp/SoFixer -m 0x788010c000 -s .../librootcheck.so.dump.so -o .../librootcheck.so.dump.so.fix.so
[main_loop:87]start to rebuild elf file
...
Done!!!
librootcheck.so_0x788010c000_20480_fix.so
```

The output file `librootcheck.so_0x788010c000_20480_fix.so` is the reconstructed ELF of the library ready for static analysis.
````

---

> title: Getting Loaded Native Libraries Dynamically

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Extracting Loaded Native Libraries
```

platform: android
---

> This technique describes how to enumerate the native libraries loaded into memory by a running Android app. Unlike @MASTG-TECH-0x02, which identifies bundled native libraries statically, this approach requires the app to be running on a device or emulator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This technique describes how to extract the native libraries loaded into memory by a running Android app.

Unlike @MASTG-TECH-0x02, which identifies bundled native libraries statically, this approach requires the app to be running on a device or emulator.
```

> This technique describes how to enumerate the native libraries loaded into memory by a running Android app. Unlike @MASTG-TECH-0x02, which identifies bundled native libraries statically, this approach requires the app to be running on a device or emulator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This technique describes how to identify and extract the native libraries loaded into memory by a running Android app. Unlike @MASTG-TECH-0x02, which identifies bundled native libraries statically from the APK, this approach requires the app to be running on a device.
```

## Using Process Memory Maps

> The file `/proc/<pid>/maps` contains the currently mapped memory regions and their access permissions. Using this file, we can get the list of the libraries loaded in the process.

Reviewer: This section is not practical and missing real examples and tools that show how to dump native libraries loaded in memory. 

I attach the most common way to do it below, with a real, tested example:
